.. SPDX-License-Identifier: copyleft-next-0.3.1

==================
Working with wmill
==================

``wmill`` is the Windmill command-line client. It moves workspace content
between the running instance and this repository, where git is the source of
truth. See the upstream `wmill CLI`_ documentation for the full command set.

.. _wmill CLI: https://www.windmill.dev/docs/advanced/cli

``wmill`` is provisioned from Nix, pinned to the server version, not a host
install. Enter the dev shell with ``nix develop`` to put it on ``PATH``, or
prefix a single command with ``nix develop --command``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ nix develop --command wmill --version

Connecting
==========

Point the CLI at the local instance once it is running (see
:doc:`/deployment/nix` to bring it up). The interactive login opens a browser,
which a host with no desktop has not got, so do the first-run setup over the
API. A fresh instance ships the default superadmin ``admin@windmill.dev`` /
``changeme`` and only a ``starter`` workspace; authenticate, create the
``kdevops`` workspace, mint a CLI token, and point ``wmill`` at it:

.. code-block:: console

   $ url=http://localhost:8000
   $ sess=$(curl --silent --request POST "$url/api/auth/login" \
       --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
       --data '{"email":"admin@windmill.dev","password":"changeme"}')
   $ curl --silent --request POST "$url/api/workspaces/create" \
       --header "Authorization: Bearer $sess" \
       --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
       --data '{"id":"kdevops","name":"kdevops"}'
   $ token=$(curl --silent --request POST "$url/api/users/tokens/create" \
       --header "Authorization: Bearer $sess" \
       --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
       --data '{"label":"wmill-cli"}')
   $ wmill workspace add kdevops kdevops "$url/" --token "$token"

Change that default password after the first login. ``wmill init`` writes
AI-assistant context and a few editor files that are git-ignored; it is
optional.

Two workflows
=============

The project supports two ways to work, and a contributor may choose either.

Bidirectional (recommended)
---------------------------

Edit in the Windmill UI or on disk, then reconcile through git. Because the
files are kept in the canonical form described in
:doc:`/reference/wmill-yaml`, the round-trip has no diff:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wmill sync pull          # instance -> files
   $ nix run .#reflow         # keep descriptions as clean literal blocks
   $ wmill sync push          # files -> instance
   $ git add <paths> && git commit --signoff

This unlocks the full engine: UI editing, ``wmill dev``, and a real pull.

Push-only
---------

Hand-author the YAML on disk, deploy with ``wmill sync push --yes``, and never
pull. This preserves hand-tuned formatting but does not capture UI edits back
to git. Prefer the bidirectional flow unless you have a reason not to.

Previewing a flow
=================

``wmill dev`` opens a live page that renders a local flow or script and writes
UI edits straight back to disk, one flow at a time, which is gentler than a bulk
pull:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wmill dev --path f/qsu/boot

See the `dev and preview`_ documentation for ``wmill dev`` and
``wmill flow preview``.

.. _dev and preview: https://www.windmill.dev/docs/advanced/cli/dev-preview

Generated content
=================

``f/qsu/bringup.flow/flow.yaml`` is generated by ``scripts/gen-bringup.py`` and
is never pulled; regenerate it with ``python3 scripts/gen-bringup.py`` after
changing a source subflow.
